Analects of Confucius a book that I read
for the first time as a teenager and
then I'm now reading for the second time
as an old man it absolutely did not
occur to me it did not occur to me that
I would have less appreciation for this
book in my old age
then I have when I was a teenager think
of all the things I've done in the last
few decades I studied Buddhism I learned
pal League I've lived in Cambodia Laos
Thailand various parts of China I
started studying the Chinese language I
briefly study Japanese I've studied such
an amazing array of things and history
politics and languages of Asia you might
think that now and a41
in giving this book a second chance that
I would have some kind of deeper or more
profound appreciation for the philosophy
of Confucius but I think that'll be a
little bit like saying to an atheist if
you were now to reread the Bible would
you have more or less appreciation for
it or more or less contempt perhaps I
utterly despise the philosophy of
Confucius and it's very interesting that
now at 41 I'm rereading it simultaneous
with a rereading of Lord Shang yang
normally no English - says Lord Xiang
Lord Xiang Yang's book that started the
counter Confucian current in Chinese
philosophy normally called in English
legalism what Xiang yang is constantly
preaching against is this horrifying
vision of a society where advancement
and promotion within the aristocracy and
within the government is based on your
ability to memorize and recite passages
of poetry where government is not in the
hands of capable competent men who know
how to farm who know how to lead an army
who know how to resolve a court case who
know how to collect taxes know where
government is in the hands of a bunch of
effete and useless aristocrats who spend
all of their time standing around and
carrying out fancy tea drinking
ceremonies
swilling wine complimenting each other
singing songs together memorizing and
reciting poetry from the supposedly
respectable compendium of literature
known as the book of ODEs what Shang
yang is warning us against is the
horrifying vision of precisely what
Chinese society was to become it was a
sigh ities at during the lifetime of
Confucius was based on advancement by
memorizing and reciting the literature
that was already ancient during the time
that Confucius was alive and many many
centuries later the work of Confucius
itself would replace the book of oz
would replace the edging also the book
of documents it's called an Englishman
strangely you know would replace that
more ancient literature as being the
touchstone the the source texts the
locust classic us that every scholarly
gentleman must memorize must commit to
memory must write examinations about in
order to get ahead so Lord Shang
represents a kind of pragmatic mud and
blood technocracy saying no you need men
who are responsible
you need to have promotion that's based
on bravery in battle and you know the
people who are in charge of farming need
to be competent in agriculture what one
of his most strikingly modern sentiments
is that government should not be based
on superstition government should based
on statistics you should use the
statistical method and evaluate it what
you do with your land Lord Shang is very
big on the rule of law and order and he
very bluntly and brutally talks about
the enforcement of law and creating the
people's trust in government through law
enforcement and so on and so forth
whereas someone like Confucius has a
completely superstitious an irrational
notion of how government works and if
how people come to trust their rulers
and how rulers come to inspire good
behavior in their people what Confucius
tells you reading the text shall we say
literally I'll tell you in just a moment
whatever
by literally and what would be the
opposite of literally in this context
reading the text literally Confucius
tells you again and again it doesn't
matter who wins the war it doesn't
matter who has the best soldiers it
doesn't matter eyes the best army money
doesn't matter don't worry about what
matters is the performance of ritual
correctly and cultivating your own
mannerisms so that your whole life is
kind of pervaded with ritual ritual not
merely in the sense of sacrificing a
goat at the altar to the gods which they
do we get details about that that kind
of ritual is a huge part of life but
then also that in your relationship with
your parents and the fellow villagers
everyone I mean that almost every part
of your life is pervaded with and
defined by write and ritual shows it so
well done it and then the other side of
it is this inner struggle for the
cultivation of true virtue and we're
told again and again that performing the
rituals alone learning the customs
singing the right songs memorizing the
poems nature book of votes
all of that would be meaningless if you
didn't have the inner virtue behind it
if you weren't performing these rituals
with sincerity and if you do that
Confucius is literally teaching you that
those other things don't matter you
don't have to worry about or any money
you don't have to worry about whether or
not you starve you don't have to worry
about whether not the people of your
kingdom are gonna starve you don't have
to worry about who wins the war because
all you do is when you sit on the throne
when you govern whether you're the mayor
or the king of the whole kingdom
whatever when you occupy that position
of authority everyone respects you in
response to you because you have this
kind of ritual purity on your side and
then you have also this inner purity
this true virtue this true goodness that
he's very interested in tell you about
cultivating and that is what we would
call complete the only defense
I can offer of Confucius the only
positive thing I can say about him is
that I do think in his own time when he
was himself alive all of this was meant
to be
interpreted with a certain wink of the
eye a certain clinda you know he's
standing there giving this morality
lecture and saying well you know we're
fine gentlemen like you and I we don't
care about earning money and in reality
all the students are spending most of
their time worrying about earning money
well you know we're fine gentlemen like
you and I we don't spend our time
chasing after beautiful women something
mentioned many many times and his
students are of course obsessed with
chasing beautiful women and you know we
we can't be too concerned about military
affairs it's completely explicit in this
text that Confucius himself and his
students they are practicing archery
they are asking each other questions
about what would you do if you were the
commander leading an army of three
columns what we do in this and that
military conflict they studied military
concepts in the past they're asking
questions about ongoing military
conflicts at that time they are
political creatures and they are
creatures who are effete aristocrats but
to some extent it remains a fighting
aristocracy it remains a concept of the
aristocracy that's still very directly
rooted in military service and shall we
say carrying out the law whether that's
acting as a judge or jury or executioner
to be blunt and the Confucian Estrada
sized for that also so what most people
would tell you is that when you read
Lord Shang you're looking at the sort of
brutal mud and blood reality of politics
even of economics whereas with Confucius
you're looking at some kind of refined
religious ideal of what it is to be a
good manner lead a good life I have to
tell you the religious ideal that's
presented here taking it seriously is
much more horrifying to me than the
religious ideal of the New Testament of
Christianity I'm an atheist
I'm a nihilistic atheist and I've
certainly spent much more time in my
life worrying about and lecturing about
what's wrong with Christianity currently
and historically then I have spent time
worrying about what was wrong with
Confucianism but the warning issued by
young the warning issued by Lord Xiang
is profoundly right nothing could be
more horrible than to live in a society
where advancement and promotion in
government and in the aristocracy is
based on your ability to memorize and
recite erotic poetry written a few
centuries earlier where the king and the
ministers select a young man and put him
in charge of an army or put him in
charge of agricultural reform on the
basis of the fact that he has refined
manners when sipping tea or swilling
alcohol and standing around and courting
poetry and casually participating in
archery contest this is an absolutely
horrible vision of how to organize a
society and it held back the development
of China for many many centuries this
really was you know China's Dark Ages
this is the secret formula for why China
never did make the progress that Europe
did over a period of say 2,000 years
there's a whole lot wrong with Chinese
society that we can see in germ or in
principle here in the the Analects of
Confucius going further though even just
inwardly personally morally ethically I
would rather try to live my life by
sincerely interpreting and applying the
principles that are in the New Testament
that Iran in Christianity then living by
these principles these these are bad
principles this this is very bad advice
for how to be a good person even
compared to a religion I don't believe
in and despise like Christianity um to
give a little bit of credit where it's
due
Christianity is both anti-clerical in
terms of the actual text of the New
Testament the Bible and it's quite a tea
ritual remember that old line let the
dead bury the dead it's not what goes
into a man's mouth that defiles him
that's what comes out of his mouth you
have many many passages where Jesus is
telling you explicitly that the ways of
the old temple the Judaism of the the
Temple in Jerusalem are now over and
what a coincidence this book was
actually written in the context of the
discretion destruction of the temple
it very much emerge from its own
political and historical circumstances
that instead the ethic of what it means
to live a good life and be a good Jew
although we now think of this as
Christianity now Judaism in its own time
this was a kind of air SATs reform of
Judaism what it meant to be a good Jew
was no longer going to be something
defined by these rituals so the et
ritual element of Christianity alone
makes it a much better philosophy to
live by than this which is ultimately
mired in the backward-looking
view of a man who lived in a period of
time when the Zhuo dynasty was falling
apart and ending and who was squarely
facing backward toward the past and said
no said no to all the progress that's
represented by someone like Shang yang
said no no no let's go backward backward
backward not forward
let's keep imitating our ancestors let's
keep imitating them right down to the
minor details of the type of cup you use
when performing a certain ritual and the
ritual is performed in the palace and by
the local kind of mayor or the local
petty government officials let's
continue to have a society that's
utterly dominated by and defined by you
know what - you and I must be utterly
meaningless details of what should be
the decorations on the ceilings and the
columns of people in different stations
of government and how to perform funeral
rituals this sort of thing the the
notion of ritual here which includes
acts just as crude as tribal people
ritually sacrificing a goat or a lamb
and it's it's no better than what you
might think of as you know a backward
tribal people with their witch doctor
killing an animal for magical and
superstitious reasons that kind of
ritual is part of this life but it's
almost worse to see this the way in
which right and ritual and ritualistic
attitudes are supposed to infest and
corrupt every element of your life
including your relationship with your
parents your relationship with your
children your relationship with your
husband or wife and of course the
delusion he asked you to participate in
is that if only you will be pious enough
if only you will conform honestly and
utterly with these rituals they
you will be rewarded with wealth without
having to pursue wealth that magically
the universe this is very much like the
power of positive thinking in our times
and there's this hit book the secret
there's some ways in which this
resonates with shocky hippie
religiosity in the 21st century if only
you as a ruler practice this kind of
purity inwardly and outwardly then you
will be rewarded with having a great
Kingdom and the people will obey you
you'll inspire the people to be good
people and there will be law and order
there'll be law and order that doesn't
rest on the use of brutality and force
or even the quality of the laws you're
writing whatever doesn't come from these
worldly sources it comes from this
supernatural and mysterious source that
is a worldview that I can say is somehow
more anti-realist than Christianity so
that's my wistful reflection for you the
particular translation is excellent the
introduction even though it's only about
10 or 12 pages it's worth buying the
book for for those 10 or 12 pages in the
introduction very informative sums up a
lot of save you four years of going to
university frankly you just read the
introduction twice but the book itself
is absolute garbage and I close this
video just by saying we're living
through a period of time in the year
2020 when Confucius has been transformed
from being the great enemy of the
Communist Party of China to being the
mascot of the Communist Party today all
around the world the Communist Party
operates what's called the Confucius
Institute it's a chain of Institute's
all around the world they've taken the
name of Confucius and the idea of
Confucianism and they've made it into
something that represents the new China
in the same way that Mickey Mouse
represents the Walt Disney Corporation I
don't have any sincere fear that China
will revert to the mentality of the Dark
Ages but it's certainly a period of time
when we all have to look at China with
one eyebrow raised and asked what is
next